## uCISC Programming Guide

1. [Getting Started](1.0_Getting_Started.md) <-- you are here
    1. [Configuring IntelliJ](1.1_Configuring_IntelliJ.md)
    2. [Configuring VIM](1.2_Configuring_VIM.md)
    3. [Compiling uCISC Code](1.3_Compiling_uCISC_Code.md)
    4. [Using the uCISC Simulator](1.4_Simulating_uCISC.md)
    5. [Using the uCISC Soft Core](1.5_Running_uCISC_Soft_Core.md)
2. [Introduction to Programming With uCISC](2.0_Program_With_uCISC.md)
    1. [Accessing External Devices](2.1_Accessing_Devices.md)
    2. [Common Devices](2.2.0_Common_Devices.md)
        1. [GPIO](2.2.1_GPIO_Devices.md)
        2. [I2C](2.2.2_I2C_Devices.md)
        3. [UART](2.2.3_UART_Devices.md)
        4. [Video Devices](2.2.4_Video_Devices.md)
    3. [Advanced uCISC Programming Techiques](2.3_Advanced_Programming_Techniques.md)
3. [uCISC Syntax Quick Reference](3_Syntax_Quick_Reference.md)
4. [Standard Libraries](4_Standard_Libraries.md)
5. [Instruction Set Details](5_Instruction_Set_Details.md)

## Getting Started

This guide will walk you through step-by-step getting started with uCISC. I am in
the process of making this as easy as possible, but there are a few steps to go through
to get it running.

### 1. Editor Setup

If you want to write uCISC code with syntax highlighting, which I highly recommend.
Both vim and IntelliJ have some measure of support. See one of the following:

1. [Configuring IntelliJ](1.1_Configuring_IntelliJ.md)
2. [Configuring VIM](1.2_Configuring_VIM.md)

The syntax highlighting is not complicated and a basic keyword highlighter will do
well enough. That's all the IntelliJ guide is. If you have some ability to customize
keywords in your favorite text editor, you can probably roughly follow it to do
something similar in your editor.

### 2. Compiling code

For the moment, the Kotlin compiler is the only supported compiler. It will be merged
into this repo at some point. That way you don't have to go to multiple places.

Follow the instructions in the [project README](https://github.com/grokthis/ucisc-kotlin#readme).
In particular, it is very useful to follow the second installation step and get the
`ucisc` command on your path for easy access.

Quick referece for the compile command:

```
> ucisc -c <file.ucisc> > out.hex
```

For example, to compile `examples/fib.ucisc`, you would do:

```
> ucisc -c examples/fib.ucisc > fib.hex
```

### 3. Running the simulator

The current version of the simulator is a little out of date as I have been mostly
running on an actual soft core on a TinyFPGA. I have no idea if it still works with
the latest compiler. I will work on getting it up to date either way.

To compile and run an ucisc file in the simulator:

```
> ucisc <file.ucisc>
```

For `examples/fib.ucisc`:

```
> ucisc examples/fib.ucisc
```

If you run ucisc without any args, it will print the help:

```
> ucisc
Usage: ucisc [-r=<file>] [-t=<file>] [options] <source.ucisc> [<source.ucisc> ...]
  -c :  Compile and dump hex
  -d :  Start in debug mode
  -r :  Specify the UART Rx file
  -t :  Specify the UART Tx file
  -e :  Send EOT char after Rx file finishes
```

Debug mode is very helpful, it will allow you to step through your code in the
simulator. It has some limitations, but has been very helpful when I can't spot
my logic error.

If you don't want to start in debug mode, you can insert a 'halt' command in your
code to pause it:

```
pc <- copy pc/0  # Infinite loop that is treated as a breakpoint by the simulator
```

If you need the UART port hooked up, you'll need to do a little more
work. First, you'll need to create a virtual 2-way serial port. On linux you
can do that with `socat`

```
> sudo apt install socat
> socat -d -d pty,raw,echo=0 pty,raw,echo=0
```

This will print out something like:

```
2020/11/30 19:06:28 socat[9758] N PTY is /dev/pts/4
2020/11/30 19:06:28 socat[9758] N PTY is /dev/pts/5
2020/11/30 19:06:28 socat[9758] N starting data transfer loop with FDs [5,5] and [7,7]
```

The two PTY devices are the two ends of your serial port. Hook one end to
your serial application (I recommend GTKTerm) and the other to the uCISC
emulator:

```
ucisc -r=/dev/pts/4 -t=/dev/pts/4 examples/space.ucisc
```

You can use the UART to just send a file to the simulator. To do that, you may
want to have the UART send an EOT character once the transmission is complete. To
do that, add the `-e` option.

### 4. Running on real hardware

There are several hardware implementations in various stages of completion. Your best
bet at the moment is probably to pick up a TinyFPGA and get your code running on
there. This is a WIP, but with a little hacking you can get it.

1. Install [yosys](https://github.com/YosysHQ/yosys)
2. Install [nextpnr](https://github.com/YosysHQ/nextpnr#nextpnr-ice40) for Project Ice Storm
3. Compile ucisc code with the compiler (see above)
4. Copy compiled hex file to `hardware/01_GK110/ICE40/prog.hex`
5. Split the hex file so that it maps onto the hardware memory properly

Run the ucisc.tools.Utilities java class with the following args:

```
hex-split hardware/01_GK110/ICE40/prog.hex
```

6. Attach your TinyFPGA to your computer and compile the soft core with your code in it:

```
cd hardware/01_GK110/ICE40
make clean prog
```

If all goes smoothly, you should get a working processor. This is the hardware design
for my GK110 calculator project. More details coming, but you should be able to get
this working with GPIO and I2C.