## uCISC Programming Guide

1. [Getting Started](1.0_Getting_Started.md)
   1. [Configuring IntelliJ](1.1_Configuring_IntelliJ.md)
   2. [Configuring VIM](1.2_Configuring_VIM.md)
   3. [Compiling uCISC Code](1.3_Compiling_uCISC_Code.md)
   4. [Using the uCISC Simulator](1.4_Simulating_uCISC.md)
   5. [Using the uCISC Soft Core](1.5_Running_uCISC_Soft_Core.md)
2. [Introduction to Programming With uCISC](2.0_Program_With_uCISC.md)
   1. [Accessing External Devices](2.1_Accessing_Devices.md) <-- you are here
   2. [Common Devices](2.2.0_Common_Devices.md)
      1. [GPIO](2.2.1_GPIO_Devices.md)
      2. [I2C](2.2.2_I2C_Devices.md)
      3. [UART](2.2.3_UART_Devices.md)
      4. [Video Devices](2.2.4_Video_Devices.md)
   3. [Advanced uCISC Programming Techniques](2.3_Advanced_Programming_Techniques.md)
3. [uCISC Syntax Quick Reference](3_Syntax_Quick_Reference.md)
4. [Standard Libraries](4_Standard_Libraries.md)
5. [Instruction Set Details](5_Instruction_Set_Details.md)

# Accessing Attached Hardware

uCISC processors communicate with other processors and devices through a modified
memory [bank switching](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bank_switching) mechanism.

## uCISC Memory Layout

```
Each address references a word (16-bits), not a byte (8-bits)

%0000 <------------------------- 64k Address Space ---------------------------> %FFFF
  #################################################################################
  #                                                                               #
  #                  (up to) 64k Words Local Processor Memory                     #
  #                                                                               #
  #################################################################################
           |           |           |           |           |           |         
         ######      ######      ######      ######      ######      ######      
         # r1 #      # r2 #      # r3 #      # r4 #      # r5 #      # r6 #      
         ######      ######      ######      ######      ######      ######      
           |           |           |           |           |           |         
  #################################################################################
  #                   #                                                           #
  #      4k Words     #                       60k Words                           #
  #   Device Control  #                  Device Block Memory                      #
  #                   #                                                           #
  #################################################################################
%0000 <------------------------- 64k Address Space ---------------------------> %FFFF
```

#### Access

Registers can be individually configured (via the control register) to point at
either local memory or device memory. Instructions are *always* loaded from local
memory since the `pc` register can't be switched to device memory.

#### Local Memory

Each processor can access up to 64k words of local memory that is directly attached
to the processor. This memory is designed to be fast in order to keep up with program
execution. This contains all the instructions needed to run a program (unless the
program specifically supports logic that will page its code in/out of other storage).

No other device can access this memory directly.

#### Device Control Memory

Each processor can have up to 256 attached devices. Each device has 16 words of memory
in the control space. This memory is used to configure each device. Device 0 is
located at 0x0000, device 1 is located at 0x0010 and so on, all the way up to device
255 at 0x0FF0.

Each device control space uses the following:

* 0x0 - Device ID (read only)
* 0x1 - Flags (MSB, mixed R/W) | Device type (LSB, read only)
* 0x2 to 0xF - Device specific (see [Common Devices](2.2.0_Common_Devices.md) for info)

#### Device Block Memory

240 of the 256 possible devices may also have an attached block memory address.
These are pages of 256 words that allow bulk data read/writes to/from the device.
Device 16 uses block address 0x1000, device 17 uses block address 0x1100, and so
on up to device 255 at address 0xFF00.

The first 16 devices do not have available block memory since the first 1k of device
space contains the device control space.

#### Differences from Traditional Banked Models

With a traditional banked model, the entire memory block is swapped in and out. This
means all registers and CPU logic sees the swapped memory as native memory. This is
very useful for systems with lots of ROMs, tight integrated timing and cartridge
support. You can just magically put a cartridge in and have it run code with this
model.

However, that model is very limiting:

1. Other devices take up memory space (such as the video chip)
2. Your CPU frequency is limited by the slowest cartridge or device

With register specific banking, you can simultaneously access two different 64k
address spaces. The system can also be faster since the CPU local memory can be
timed to the CPU frequency more tightly, giving better performance.

This means a fully loaded, fully connected uCISC processor can directly address
128k words (256kb) of memory space.

### Device Behavior

1. You are not guaranteed to be directly writing to a device. For example, if writing
   to a block memory device, you are probably actually writing to a local cache that
   must then be paged back to main memory.

2. In general, reads/writes are non-blocking. You may be reading/writing stale data
   or interrupting background work in progress. Usually these systems will provide
   flags with information about the devices state.

3. It is not required that a device use the block memory. It may be sufficient for
   many devices to simply use the control block.

4. R/W behavior from unmapped devices are as follows:
   1. Writes are always ignored
   2. Control reads always return 0x0000
   3. Block reads may return any value

The only thing that is really guaranteed is the device memory layout. The
rest of it depends on hardware. Read the documentation for that device carefully.

### Accessing Device Space

The 16-bit control register turns on or off banking for each of the 6 general
purpose registers. Each register is controlled by the 0-indexed bit that matches it`s
name. R1 is the second bit, R5 is the sixth, and so on. Bits 0, 4 and 8 and higher
are not currently used.

Note: instructions are *always* loaded from local memory. That is, all code must be
loaded into local memory before execution is possible. You can not execute code
directly from a device.

### Typical Device Listing

This device map is just a guideline and not required.

* 0x0000            - The current processor
* 0x0010            - GPIO Pins
* 0x0020            - Realtime Clock
* 0x0030 <-> 0x00F0 - Motherboard devices (13 devices)
* 0x0100 <-> 0x0270 - I/O Bus Devices (24 devices)
  * 0x0100 - I2C Bus (main)
  * 0x0110 - I2C Bus (secondary control bus)
  * 0x0120 - SPI Bus
  * 0x0130 - I2S Bus
  * 0x0140 - UART
  * 0x0150 - 0x0270 - I/O Bus (UART, USB, etc) 
* 0x0280 <-> 0x03F0 - Low latency block devices (24 devices, typically RAM expansion)
* 0x0400 <-> 0x05F0 - High latency block I/O (32 devices, typically disks, network, etc)
* 0x0600 <-> 0x07F0 - Not typically used (32 devices)
* 0x0800 <-> 0x0FF0 - Other processors/compute devices (128 devices)
