## uCISC Programming Guide

1. [Getting Started](1.0_Getting_Started.md)
   1. [Configuring IntelliJ](1.1_Configuring_IntelliJ.md)
   2. [Configuring VIM](1.2_Configuring_VIM.md)
   3. [Compiling uCISC Code](1.3_Compiling_uCISC_Code.md)
   4. [Using the uCISC Simulator](1.4_Simulating_uCISC.md)
   5. [Using the uCISC Soft Core](1.5_Running_uCISC_Soft_Core.md)
2. [Introduction to Programming With uCISC](2.0_Program_With_uCISC.md)
   1. [Accessing External Devices](2.1_Accessing_Devices.md)
   2. [Common Devices](2.2.0_Common_Devices.md)
      1. [GPIO](2.2.1_GPIO_Devices.md)
      2. [I2C](2.2.2_I2C_Devices.md) <-- you are here
      3. [UART](2.2.3_UART_Devices.md)
      4. [Video Devices](2.2.4_Video_Devices.md)
   3. [Advanced uCISC Programming Techniques](2.3_Advanced_Programming_Techniques.md)
3. [uCISC Syntax Quick Reference](3_Syntax_Quick_Reference.md)
4. [Standard Libraries](4_Standard_Libraries.md)
5. [Instruction Set Details](5_Instruction_Set_Details.md)

## I2C Device

I2C devices communicate with I2C components on the bus.

Device specific flags:
```
0000 SSSA 0000 1001
```

* A - (R) data mode (0 = control, 1 = block)
* SSS - (R/W) selects the speed for I2C protocol:
    * 000 - Not set, device disabled
    * 001 - Standard (100 kbit/s)
    * 010 - Fast mode (400 kbit/s)
    * 011 - Fast mode plus (1 Mbit/s)
    * 100 - High Speed (1.7 Mbit/s)
    * 101 - High Speed (3.4 Mbit/s)
    * 110 - Ultra Fast Mode (5 Mbit/s)
    * 111 - Maximum supported

For the speed control flag, the device starts configured with 000, which disables
the device. When set to a specific speed mode, the device will become enabled and
operate according to the mode flag. If set to 111, the device will fall back to
the maximum speed supported (which can subsequently be read by the CPU). If you
attempt to set the speed to an unsupported mode, it will cause the device to become
disabled and the speed flag set to 000.

Control block addresses:

* 0x2 - I2C bus device address (i.e. I2C device address). The address is in the lower
  byte of the word. The 7-bit I2C address is in the most significant 7 positions of the
  byte and has the R/W bit at the end. You can change the R/W mode by flipping the
  lowest bit in the register.
* 0x3 - The remaining bytes in the current I2C interaction. If zero, the message is
  complete and the device is not busy. To initiate a communication, write a positive
  integer to this register and the device will either send or receive that number of
  bytes. If the device is in control mode, at most 24 bytes may be transferred at
  once. If in block mode, at most 512 bytes may be transferred at once.
* 0x4 to 0xF - Data buffer for control mode (up to 24 bytes). This space is treated
  as a contiguous block of bytes from the MSB of 0x4 to the LSB of 0xF. Thus, bytes
  are written or read to/from the most significant byte in the word first.

Note: Not all I2C devices will allow block mode. In addition, specific I2C devices may
limit the maximum number of bytes available in control mode. See the specific
documentation of the device in question.