## uCISC Programming Guide

1. [Getting Started](1.0_Getting_Started.md)
    1. [Configuring IntelliJ](1.1_Configuring_IntelliJ.md)
    2. [Configuring VIM](1.2_Configuring_VIM.md)
    3. [Compiling uCISC Code](1.3_Compiling_uCISC_Code.md)
    4. [Using the uCISC Simulator](1.4_Simulating_uCISC.md)
    5. [Using the uCISC Soft Core](1.5_Running_uCISC_Soft_Core.md)
2. [Introduction to Programming With uCISC](2.0_Program_With_uCISC.md)
    1. [Accessing External Devices](2.1_Accessing_Devices.md)
    2. [Common Devices](2.2.0_Common_Devices.md)
        1. [GPIO](2.2.1_GPIO_Devices.md)
        2. [I2C](2.2.2_I2C_Devices.md)
        3. [UART](2.2.3_UART_Devices.md) <-- you are here
        4. [Video Devices](2.2.4_Video_Devices.md)
    3. [Advanced uCISC Programming Techiques](2.3_Advanced_Programming_Techniques.md)
3. [uCISC Syntax Quick Reference](3_Syntax_Quick_Reference.md)
4. [Standard Libraries](4_Standard_Libraries.md)
5. [Instruction Set Details](5_Instruction_Set_Details.md)

## UART Device

There are both read and write buffers which the hardware translates into I/O over
UART lines.

Device specific flags:

PSBE XPRW 0000 0100

* W - Write ready (Tx writes will succeed)
* R - Read ready (Rx reads will succeed)
* P - Operation in progress (device is fulfilling a request), may not be busy
* X - Device is in error state
* E - Device is enabled. If zero (disabled), flags must all be 0
* B - Bit width, 0 for 8 bits, 1 for 9 bits
* S - Stop bits, 0 for 1 bit, 1 for 2 bits
* P - Parity bit, 0 for no parity bit, 1 for parity bit if supported

Any of the options not supported by the UART device will retain their default values
if you attempt to update them. For example, if the UART device doesn't support a parity
bit it will not enable.

### Control Memory Map
* 0x2 - Clock divider
* 0x3 - Tx buffer write
* 0x4 - Rx buffer read
* 0x5 to 0x0F - Not used

### Behavior

Tx buffer and Rx buffer are only responsive when the write and read
device flags are set respectively.

The clock divider determines the baud rate depending on the clock signal from the
processor. The Tx/Rx clock will count the number of clock cycles in the divider
value as the time between data bits for the Tx/Rx signals. For example, for a 16MHz
clock, setting this value to 1667 will give you approximately 9600 baud.
