## uCISC Programming Guide

1. [Getting Started](1.0_Getting_Started.md)
   1. [Configuring IntelliJ](1.1_Configuring_IntelliJ.md)
   2. [Configuring VIM](1.2_Configuring_VIM.md)
   3. [Compiling uCISC Code](1.3_Compiling_uCISC_Code.md)
   4. [Using the uCISC Simulator](1.4_Simulating_uCISC.md)
   5. [Using the uCISC Soft Core](1.5_Running_uCISC_Soft_Core.md)
2. [Introduction to Programming With uCISC](2.0_Program_With_uCISC.md)
   1. [Accessing External Devices](2.1_Accessing_Devices.md)
   2. [Common Devices](2.2.0_Common_Devices.md)
      1. [GPIO](2.2.1_GPIO_Devices.md) <-- you are here
      2. [I2C](2.2.2_I2C_Devices.md)
      3. [Block Memory](2.2.3_Block_Memory_Devices.md)
      4. [UART](2.2.4_UART_Devices.md)
      5. [Video Devices](2.2.5_Video_Devices.md)
   3. [Advanced uCISC Programming Techniques](2.3_Advanced_Programming_Techniques.md)
3. [uCISC Syntax Quick Reference](3_Syntax_Quick_Reference.md)
4. [Standard Libraries](4_Standard_Libraries.md)
5. [Instruction Set Details](5_Instruction_Set_Details.md)

#### Block Memory Device

Block memory devices represent a mapping to some sort of block device. This
can be some form of RAM, ROM, flash device, disk or other. Anything that
can be viewed as a sequence of memory blocks can be mapped into a block
memory device.

##### Basic process for reading data:

1. Set the block address
2. Enable read mode
3. Wait for the transfer to complete (wait for idle activity indicator)
4. Optional: Disable read mode, updates to the block address will trigger
   immediate loads if read mode is on.

The data will be available at the device block for the given device.

##### Basic process for writing data:

1. Optional: Read the data from the block
2. Enable write mode
3. Modify the data in the device block for the device. This will
   cause the dirty bit to become active.
4. Write a non-zero value to the activity indicator to trigger. The
   actual value of the activity indicator will be controlled by the
   device, but a non-zero write acts as a trigger for the write.

Standard block memory flags:
```
XMMM WRDA 0000 0011
```

Note: Block devices have a type of 0x03

* A - Read/Write: activity indicator, 1 if data transfer is active, 0 otherwise
* D - Read-only: dirty bit, 1 if data in the local buffer has changed since loading
* R - Read/Write: Read enabled (data will be read from the block device)
* W - Read/Write: Write enabled (data will be written to the block device)
* M - Read/Write: The data transfer mode (bit width), see below

Data transfer mode: a 3 bit value with the following meanings
- 0x0: Single bit transfer speed, slow mode. This will cause the device
       to operate in the standard slow mode for the given technology. This
       speed depends on the device, but should be widely supported for many
       devices with the same backing technology.
- 0x1: Single bit transfer speed, fast mode. This will cause the device
       to do single bit transfers, but at the highest available frequency.
- 0x2: Dual bit bus mode. Data will be transferred with 2 bits per cycle,
       at the highest supported speed.
- 0x3: Quad bit bus mode. Data will be transferred with 4 bits per cycle,
  at the highest supported speed.
- 0x4: Byte bus mode. Data will be transferred with 8 bits per cycle,
  at the highest supported speed.
- 0x5: Word bus mode. Data will be transferred with 16 bits per cycle,
  at the highest supported speed.
- 0x6: Device specific mode
- 0x7: Device specific mode

When setting the mode bits to a speed that is higher than the maximum supported
speed or bus width for the current device, it will only update to the maximum
supported. You can use this to detect the highest mode supported by setting it
to the max speed you want, then reading the result value from the flags register.

Control block addresses:

* 0x2 - 16-bit least significant block address (word 0)
* 0x3 - 16-bit block address (word 1)
* 0x4 - 16-bit block address (word 3)
* 0x5 - Activity indicator
* 0x6 to 0xF - Device specific, usually more detailed configuration
               or status information

The 3 words of the block address allow you to address up to 2^48 blocks, limited
to the specifics of the backing hardware. Blocks are 256 words (512 bytes). You
do not need to use all the address words:

| Address | Block Count  | Addressable Words | Bytes   |
|:--------|:-------------|:------------------|:--------|
| 1 word  | ~65 thousand | ~16.7 million     | 32 MiB  |
| 2 words | ~4.2 billion | ~1.1 trillion     | 2 TiB   |
| 3 words | ~281 billion | ~72 quadrillion   | 128 PiB |

Activity indicator uses the following format:

```
ASSS RRRR RRRR RRRR
```

A - Activity indicator, 1 if active, 0 otherwise
S - The state information about the current transfer. This is device specific
    but a value of zero indicates the idle state.
R - The lowest 12-bits are an integer with the number of remaining bits in the
    current transfer. This may be zero, even if a transfer is in progress
    depending on the state of the transfer.

You can quickly check if there is currently a transfer in progress by checking
if this value is zero. When zero, the device is idle. When non-zero the device
is doing some work, usually communicating with the backing block storage.
